Male Speaker: Let us pray.
Almighty god we come
before you on this very
special occasion from
different backgrounds and
cultures and expressions
of faith towards you, but
we all come as Americans
and those who love her.
Those who have sacrificed
for her, who have bled for
her, and who have
died for her.
Today as we gather in our
nation's most sacred home,
we have the privilege to
witness, to celebrate, and
to honor an extraordinary
naval career and a life
that has been set apart
in call to service and
devotion to this nation
and those in it.
Today we are among the
most privileged to watch
as our nation's highest
honor of special trust,
achievement, and fidelity
has both given and received.
From our nation's
commander in chief, to a
leader of naval warriors
who opinion was sought,
whose sacrifices were
selfless, and whose
dedication to duty is
unparalleled by any standard.
Today, we lift up an honor
our very own Master Chief
Britt Slablinski as our
nation's Medal of Honor is
bestowed upon him.
May he also take with him
the absolute certainty in
knowing that his days
given to this great
nation, to our beloved
navy, and to the warriors
of navel special warfare
were valued beyond measure.
We as his fellow
Americans, brothers and
sister warriors, friends
and family alike,
collectively ask for your
blessing upon our great
president, this great
naval warrior, these great
military families, and all
they do, have done, and
will continue to do
from this day forward.
On this most solemn
occasion, on this sacred
ground, we as his
teammates say well done.
And finally, whether
swimming the depths,
climbing the highest of
mountains, or soaring
through the heavens, as we
walk that lonely road of
faith, may you
always go with us.
In your holy name
we pray, amen.
The President: Thank you
very much, Chaplain.
That's beautiful.
And thank you to Deputy
Secretary of Defense
Patrick Shanahan.
Thank you, Patrick.
Undersecretary of the Navy
Thomas Modly -- thank you.
Thank you, Thomas.
VA Secretary nominee --
will do a fantastic job
for us -- Robert Wilkie.
And Congressmen Scott
Taylor and Brian Mast.
Thank you,
fellas, very much.
Thank you.
Members of the Armed
Forces and distinguished
guests, please sit down.
That actually worked
out very nicely.
(Laughter)
And join me
in officially welcoming
Master Chief Britt
Slabinski to the White House.
A special man.
A truly brave person.
Today, we pay tribute to
Britt's heroic service,
and we proudly present him
with our nation's highest
military honor -- and I
would go so far to say our
nation's highest honor.
Joining Britt today is his
son Bryce -- Bryce, thank
you very much -- a rising
senior at a wonderful
school known to the
world as Ohio State.
Great place.
That's a great school.
Along with Britt's
sisters, Brenda and Teka,
and Brenda's husband, Tom.
Thank you very much
for being here.
Here as well are Britt's
significant other,
Christina, and her two
children John and Meghan,
who we just met in
the Oval Office.
That's a special
place, too.
Thank you all for joining
us for this really special
day and special ceremony.
Thank you very much.
Finally, we're honored
to be joined by several
previous Congressional
Medal of Honor recipients.
Would you please stand.
Thank you, fellas.
(Applause)
Very,
very special people.
Your names and your
immortal acts of valor are
forever engraved in the
memory of our nation.
Our nation will always be
grateful to you, and you
know that.
Today, we induct a new
name into the world's most
exclusive gathering
of heroes.
And that's exactly
what it is.
Britt was raised
in Northampton,
Massachusetts.
He became an Eagle
Scout by the age of 14.
His father was a veteran,
who served as a frogman in
the underwater demolitions
group of the U.S. Navy.
Those are tough people.
While Britt was in junior
high, his dad brought him
to their reunion.
Britt was inspired by
their bond of friendship,
their stories of service,
and their boundless love
of country.
As soon as he graduated
from high school in 1988,
Britt enlisted in the
Navy to become a SEAL.
That means he is a
physically very strong
person, and that also
means he is a mentally
very strong person.
That's tough.
Throughout the grueling
months of training, Britt
proved himself every
single step of the way.
In 1990, he graduated the
legendary BUDS training
course and he earned that
special badge worn only by
the bravest few:
the SEAL Trident.
In 2002, Britt was called
to support Operation
Enduring Freedom
in Afghanistan.
In the late evening hours
of March 3rd that year, he
led an elite team on
a combat mission to
establish a secure
position on the peak of a
10,000-foot mountain
known as Takur Gahr.
Britt and his teammates
were preparing to exit the
helicopter onto the
mountain when their
aircraft was struck by a
machine gun and machine
gun fire like they've
never seen before, and a
rocket-propelled grenade
from al Qaeda
terrorists down below.
Not a good feeling.
As the helicopter lurched
away from the assault,
Petty Officer First Class
Neil Roberts was flung out
of the aircraft --
tremendous, tremendous,
horrible thing to witness
-- and onto the side of
the mountain before the
helicopter crashed into
the valley below.
After surviving, barely,
the violent crash, Britt
and his team were retrieved
by a second helicopter;
also, by the way, piloted
by very brave people.
At this point, Britt
received information
suggesting their comrade,
Neil Roberts, the man
thrown out of the
helicopter, was probably
still alive.
The team faced a choice:
to wait for reinforcements
and pretty much safety, or
to return immediately to
the enemy stronghold in
the hope of saving Neil's life.
They would be outmanned,
outgunned, and fighting
uphill on a steep,
icy mountain.
And every solider knows
you don't want to fight uphill.
They learned that at
Gettysburg -- you don't
fight uphill.
But they would face
freezing temperatures, and
bitter winds, at the
highest altitude of battle
in the history of the
American military.
This was the highest point
where we ever fought.
The odds were not good.
They were not
in their favor.
But Britt and his team
didn't even hesitate
for a moment.
They made their decision.
For them it was
an easy one.
They went back
to that mountain.
When their helicopter
reached the mountain peak,
they jumped out into a
furious onslaught of
machine gunfire like none
of them had ever seen before.
Britt and his teammate
Sergeant John Chapman
charged uphill toward the
enemy, where John was shot
after clearing a bunker.
Britt continued to engage
the enemy, repeatedly
exposing himself to
horrendous fire.
Two of his other
teammates, Stephen "Turbo"
Toboz and Brett Morganti,
both suffered very, very
serious leg injuries.
Britt helped them to
safety and called in
airstrikes as continuous
fire drove them
ever-further down the face
of the mountain -- got
worse and worse, more
and more dangerous.
He kept going.
In a treacherous descent,
Britt and his men carried
Turbo through the snow.
At one point, they
fashioned a makeshift
harness out of their gun
straps to hoist Turbo down
a 13-foot cliff, in itself
treacherous, because if
you miss that little area,
they go down the mountain.
No stopping them.
When they could go no
further, Britt tended to
the wounded and
coordinated their escape
until his team was finally
evacuated from enemy territory.
Seven of the brave men who
fought with Britt are here
with us today, and maybe
they'll stand up
as I call their name.
Petty Officer Second
Class Brett Morganti.
Pretty dangerous
place, huh?
Way to go, Brett.
Chief Warrant Officer
Kyle Soderberg.
Thank you, Kyle.
Petty Officer Second
Class Stephen Toboz.
Thanks, Stephen.
Chief Warrant
Officer Al Mack.
Thank you.
Sergeant Christopher
Cunningham.
Master Sergeant Eric
Stebner -- a Master Chief
Petty Officer still on
active duty is quietly not
with us today.
I just want to
thank you all.
Unbelievable
acts of bravery.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Thank
you, folks.
Thank you very much.
Incredible.
Today, we also remember
the brave soldiers who
gave their lives on that
mountain: Technical
Sergeant John Chapman,
Corporal Matthew Commons,
Specialist Marc Anderson,
Sergeant Bradley Crose,
Senior Airman Jason
Cunningham, Technical
Sergeant Philip Svitak,
and of course, Petty
Officer First Class Neil
Roberts -- who met a
horrible death -- for whom
these events are now known --
it's called the Battle
of Robert's Ridge.
Incredible event.
To the Gold Star family
members of those heroes
who are here today,
please stand up.
Please, stand up.
(Applause)
Please.
It's an honor to have
you accept our nation's
profound sorrow and a deep love
and everlasting gratitude.
These were incredible,
incredible men, and you
can be proud that they
were in your family.
And they are looking down
right now, and they are
very, very proud of you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you.
To Britt, and to all of
the men of Robert's Ridge:
You waged a fierce fight
against the enemies.
And these really have
become the enemies of
America and the enemies
of all civilization.
Through your actions, you
demonstrated that there is
no love more pure, and no
courage more great, than
the love and courage that
burns in the hearts of
American patriots.
We are free because
warriors like you are
willing to give their
sweat, their blood, and,
if have to, their lives
for our great nation.
Britt, you went on to
serve many more years
in the U.S. Navy
before finally
retiring in 2014.
Today, he continues
his life of serving by
volunteering with the Navy
SEAL Foundation, and on
behalf of Gold
Star families.
Special, special,
incredible families.
And as one of his fellow
service members testifies,
he is an amazing father to
Bryce, who, like his dad,
is now an Eagle Scout.
Britt wants the country
to know that for him, the
recognition he is about to
receive is an honor that
falls on the whole team --
he wants you folks to know
that -- on the whole team,
on every American warrior
who fought the forces
of terror on that snowy
Afghan ridge.
Each of them has entered
the eternal chronicle of
American valor and
American bravery.
Britt, we salute
you, we thank you.
We thank God for making
you a United States SEAL.
We love our Navy SEALs.
They've very special,
very incredible people.
It's now my tremendous
privilege to present to
you the Congressional
Medal of Honor.
And I'd like the military
aide to come forward and
please read the citation.
Thank you.
Military Aide: The
President of the United
States, in the name of the
Congress, takes pleasure
in presenting the Medal
of Honor to Senior Chief
Special Warfare Operator
Sea, Air, and Land, Britt K.
Slabinski, United States
Navy, for service as set
forth in the following:
For conspicuous gallantry
and intrepidity at the
risk of his life above and
beyond the call of duty
while assigned to a joint
task force in support
of Operation Enduring Freedom.
In the early morning of
March 4, 2002, Senior
Chief Special Warfare
Operator Slabinski led a
reconnaissance team to
its assigned area atop a
10,000-foot,
snow-covered mountain.
Their insertion helicopter
was suddenly riddled with
rocket-propelled grenades
and small-arms fire from
previously undetected
enemy positions.
The crippled helicopter
lurched violently and
ejected one teammate onto
the mountain before the
pilots were forced to
crash land
in the valley far below.
Senior Chief Slabinski
boldly rallied his five
remaining team members,
and marshaled supporting
assets for an assault to
rescue their stranded teammate.
During reinsertion, the
team came under fire from
three directions, and one
teammate started moving
uphill toward an
enemy strongpoint.
Without regard for his
own safety, Senior Chief
Slabinski charged directly
toward enemy fire to join
his teammate.
Together, they fearlessly
assaulted and cleared the
first bunker they
encountered.
The enemy then unleashed
a hail of machinegun fire
from a second hardened
position only 20 meters away.
Senior Chief Slabinski
repeatedly exposed himself
to deadly fire to
personally engage the
second enemy bunker and
orient his team's fires in
the furious,
close-quarters firefight.
Proximity made air
support impossible.
And after several
teammates became
casualties, the situation
became untenable.
Senior Chief Slabinski
maneuvered his team to a
more defensible position,
directed airstrikes in
very close proximity to
his team's position, and
requested reinforcements.
As daylight approached,
accurate enemy mortar fire
forced the team
further down the sheer
mountainside.
Senior Chief Slabinski
carried a seriously
wounded teammate through
deep snow, and led a
difficult trek across
precipitous terrain while
calling in fire on the
enemy, which was engaging
the team from the
surrounding ridges.
Throughout the next 14
hours, Senior Chief
Slabinski stabilized
casualties and continued
the fight against the
enemy until the hill was
secured and his
team was extracted.
By his undaunted courage,
bold initiative,
leadership, and devotion
to duty, Senior Chief
Slabinski reflected great
credit upon himself and
upheld the highest
traditions of the United
States Naval Service.
(The Medal of Honor
is presented)
(Applause)
(A prayer is given)